as your weight goes up the size of your
brain goes down it's like oh my God if
70 of us are overweight it's the biggest
brain drain in the history of the United
States in fact it's a national security
crisis because they're not letting as
many not as many people are eligible to
sign up for military service because we
just have an unhealthy population talk
to me about diets impact on that what
are some
main sort of ballpark things you should
be pulling out
you know it's not hard and again if I
put this these things on the board
people would gut it sugar is
pro-inflammatory it increases erratic
brain cell firing and it's addictive so
if you can get rid of a really limit
sugar that's really helpful for people
the more colorful clean fruits and
vegetables the better the one misnomer
people often have is oh I should go on a
low-fat diet the problem with that is
sixty percent of the solid weight of
your brain is fat and low fat diets can
actually trigger depression and so I
like healthy fat fish although
um clean fish
and so swordfish is out and never would
have that it's just loaded with Mercury
and I'm a huge fan of salmon wild salmon
um avocados they're like God's butter
right it's just a great brain food for
you you have to be calorie smart because
um
70 percent of us are overweight 40
percent of us are obese I publish two
studies that show as your weight goes up
the physical size and function of your
brain goes down should scare the fat off
anyone when I read that I ended up
losing 30 pounds you know I'd like tried
for 30 years and I just never really had
the motivation until I went I'm not
going to have a smaller brain I'm not
going to do that
um
so clean Protein healthy fat actually at
every meal because it helps stabilize
your blood sugar one of the biggest
things that will steal your mind is have
a high fasting blood sugar level
it's actually been shown to be
associated with brain atrophy and it
makes your blood vessels brittle and
more likely to break so there's a term I
like I didn't coin it but I like it
called diabesity It's a combination of
being overweight with high blood sugar
it's a disaster for brain function and
this is why people get addicted
it's carbohydrates simple carbohydrate
so if you ingest cupcake your pancreas
sees all the sugar and it sends out an
insulin burst well that insulin burst
drives tryptophan the amino acid
precursor to serotonin into your brain
so when you eat bread or pasta or
potatoes
your brain likes it because it feels
happier it feels more relaxed now the
problem is it kills you orally and so
you have to sort of take us but you know
the other thing that drives tryptophan
into the brain is exercise and so and
many of my athletes they exercise
intensely so they don't get depressed
and when they get hurt they get
depressed because they can't get their
antidepressant fix
and so they'll go to sugar and then
that'll make them feel terrible about
themselves and so know what's good for
tryptophan to getting into your brain
and know what's bad
so before we started rolling you said
something so fascinating and you said if
I were basically an evil genius and I
wanted to just absolutely destroy
People's Health I would create what kind
of Lifestyle
so
let's just take this mnemonic I've
created on how to keep your brain
healthy it's called bright minds and so
if I was the evil ruler
the b in bright mind stands for blood
flow
is I would give all children social
media
and video games
and encourage them to play as much as
they could
because that would drop blood flow to
their brain brand new study the more
screen time the smaller the brain that's
a little horrifying well one they're not
going outside they're not getting
exercise they're not getting the sun we
have a massive deficiency of vitamin D
in this country and exercise increases
something called bdnf or brain derived
neurotrophic Factor it helps your brain
grow so we're losing Miracle Grow
retirement and aging is the r and bright
Minds if I was an evil ruler I would let
everybody retire at 55. and not have to
and then I'd put them in front of the TV
there and make them angry at you know
whatever political fight is going on uh
the eye is inflammation which comes
basically from low omega-3 fatty acid
levels processed foods gut problems and
so I'd like um nobody gets fish in my
kingdom and we don't have fresh food we
basically have fast food restaurants
the G is genetics
um
and I don't know what you have in your
family and mine I have heart disease and
obesity obesity in a big way in my
family yeah but as you we can see genes
are not a death sentence they should be
a wake-up call to do the right things to
decrease your genetic vulnerability so
if I was the evil ruler I would go you
have obesity in your family I do a
public campaign
so it's in your family why worry about
it live it up you're going to die early
enjoy the path as opposed to what I
think is actually more rational is you
have this vulnerability you need to be
really serious about your health H is
head trauma
um I'd encourage all kids to hit soccer
balls with their head to play tackle
football to ride horses and people go
well why are you down on horses it's
like well what killed Superman was a
horse I can't tell you the number of
patients I see who had serious
addictions because they had fallen off
of a horse and had no frontal lobe
function the tea is toxins so if I was
the evil ruler I would get rid of all of
the Environmental Protection so that we
are filled with air pollution water
pollution and I would never I would tell
the manufacturers they don't have to put
the ingredients
on the labels not only for food but also
for personal products and one of the
things things like parabens and
phthalates or hormone disruptors and
aluminum and we're putting them on our
body whatever goes in your body
goes on your body goes in your body
becomes your body
um I'd think of alcohol as a health food
we've certainly had that craze I would
legalize not only legalize marijuana but
it's like let's not say it's good for us
because all of my published research
says it's bad that now does that mean if
someone's dying of cancer and it'll help
their pain and help the nausea and help
them eat God bless them right I mean so
let's be rational about it I just saw
someone had been smoking pot for 50
years and his brain was remarkably older
than he was
um the m is mental health and if I was
the evil ruler I'd create CNN and Fox
News and that it ruins People's Health
because they always lead with negative
they increase anger and frustration and
polarization the more you're exposed to
it the anger you get and the more it
separates you from other people the eye
is immunity and infections I would
belittle people who were testing
patients for Lyme disease my great
stories are patients who have Lyme one
girl she's 16. she became psychotic
after a visit to Yosemite and she went
to Ted three psychiatric
hospitalizations none of the medications
work she became a shell of herself she
came to our clinic and I'm like so what
happened at Yosemite and her mother said
we were surrounded by six deer and we
thought it was a magical moment she got
bit by deer Tech that caused Lyme that
then caused her to lose her mind and on
an antibiotic she got her mind back then
his neural hormone deficiencies and so
letting kids hit things with their head
actually drops their hormone levels and
so I test for that diabetes I'd create
the American food system Isis has
nothing on our food industry the real
one and I'm not kidding when I say it
the weapons of mass destruction are
highly processed pesticide sprayed high
glycemic low fiber food-like substances
stored in plastic containers they're
ruining our health if I'm right you know
and I'm not the only one who's published
this there's been I think 20 other
scientists as your weight goes up the
size of your brain goes down it's like
oh my God if 70 of us are overweight
it's the biggest brain drain in the
history of the United States in fact
it's a national security crisis because
they're not letting as many not as many
people are eligible to sign up for
military service because we just have an
unhealthy population and if I was an
evil ruler I would create screens that
have blue lights because they disrupt
sleep
uh because the s in bright Minds asleep
so there's so many things happening that
I'm just it gives me pause about the
society we're raising our babies and
grandbabies in I was going to say a lot
of what you're describing sounds like
what we're encountering every day so if
that's the way to really mess people up
then what is the lifestyle that is going
to help us supercharge so you talked
about sleep
um where where should we be at how much
sleep are we talking about does time of
day matter like
um and not just sleep what is the
idealized lifestyle so if we just go
back through those bright Minds risk
factors so with blood flow it's exercise
simple supplements like Ginkgo and
vinpocetine boost blood flow to the
brain simple foods like beets or cayenne
pepper Rosemary so they're dietary
things you can do their lifestyle things
exercises you've said that I thought was
really interesting is what happens in
the heart happens to the brain happens
to the genitals and what's the stat on
the number of 40 and 50 and 60 year olds
that have erectile dysfunction it's
insane 40 percent of 40 worlds
seventy percent of 70 year olds and if
you have blood flow problems anywhere it
likely means they're everywhere and it's
one of the
I don't want to say big benefits that's
bad but it's one of the benefits of the
program almost everybody's sex life gets
better which I'm like a huge fan of but
this is you know for years my
antidepressants not mine but you know
like Prozac and Zoloft and Lexapro they
decrease sexual function which that
makes me sad right it makes it harder
for women to have an orgasm or harder
for men to perform right and I'm like
well let me give you something that'll
enhance your performance because your
mood will be better and I'm always
thinking what I do for you how is that
going to affect your partner right
because I never think of myself as your
psychiatrist I always think of myself as
your families psychiatrists because I
see little kids and old people and
everybody in between
so exercise so for retirement and aging
I want you working in a job that you're
passionate about that you're purposeful
with and if you're not and some people
just aren't it's what are you doing for
new learning every day what do you do
for new learning every day is it all
around the brain or do you have stuff
outside of that no in fact it shouldn't
be like I know how to read brain scans
just reading more scams doesn't really
help my brains pattern recognition so I
play the piano which I really like
um simply piano is my app for playing
the piano which is good which is good
for my cerebellum and then I have a
table tennis coach and they give a table
tennis coach I do that's right you
played at the national level didn't you
I did but you want to get better and the
only way you get better is pay play
people better than you and so so I do
that the eye is take fish oil
and a probiotic
because what do you think about keto so
I being inflammation so
um keto is the only thing in my life
that had a a drug-like effect when I
tried it I had suffered from
inflammation for like 15 years I was
icing my wrist every night because they
just hurt and just to keep them in check
but I wasn't doing any fat in my diet I
basically lived in a state of rabbit
starvation for
two or three years and then for the
potential anti-cancer properties I'd
been hearing about ketogenics thanks to
Peter attia and Dom D'Agostino and I
thought all right I'm going to give this
a shot I went hardcore four to one so
for every combined gram of protein and
carbohydrate I was eating four grams of
fat it was miserable I hated it the most
but my wrist felt amazing that was
really transformative for me what what
are your thoughts on keto well
I'm a fan of it for neurodegenerative
diseases and for seizures in fact I have
a granddaughter who has a wicked seizure
disorder and on a ketogenic diet she
lost her seizures that's actually one of
my passion stories because when I
suggested it she's five months old she's
having 160 seizures a day and on the
diet she'll astral seizures but the
reason I'm not a fan in general is
there's not enough colorful plants and
plants have medicine so for your
pain it may have been dairy or it may
have been gluten or it may have been
corn or it may have been soy those
things that tend to go away on a
ketogenic diet it could have been one of
those things as well that was driving
the inflammation because a lot of people
would argue that meat can drive
inflammation as well and the first thing
I do with almost all of my patients that
aren't getting better is I put them on
an Elimination Diet and I have to tell
you the nutritionists in my clinics they
have more success stories than the
sciatrists so one story I had a guy that
was severely depressed he had ECT
Hospital electric shock therapy he had
been hospitalized multiple times he was
suicidal he said to me he said you're my
last hope I get that a lot that's a
little bit stressful for making
um
and I'm like nothing's worked I want you
to try an Elimination Diet he's like do
I have to I'm like really yes you have
to and so what does that mean no gluten
no Dairy
um kill the sugar no corn no soy no
artificial dyes or preservatives he's
like that's my whole diet
but I'll do it three weeks later is
dramatically better but then I said so
let's see what it is so we added back
gluten nothing happened
we added back Dairy nothing happened we
added back corn he said within 20
minutes he had a vision of a gun in his
mouth whoa
I'm like
we have to break up with corn and his
depression has not come back
wow that's crazy that isn't that crazy
yeah and I mean I should be used to that
at this point like the number of people
that have that kind of reaction to a
specific type of food and how variable
it is meaning maybe corn for me is fine
but for him is absolutely catastrophic
um and how much variability do you see
um how do you because an Elimination
Diet can be very confusing for people
how do you walk through the three you
just have to think of it really simply
it's these are foods I get to choose and
these are the foods I should lose and
you just have to know the list but like
where do you start is there a ground
zero like is it chicken breast and
broccoli like what is your start here
well you see for me the first rule is it
has to be delicious interesting and
nutritious
so I am fortunate that I'm married to a
nurse who not only is beautiful but
she's really smart and one of her best
gifts is taking really healthy food and
making it taste awesome so there is no
suffering so you have to get that in
their head and we're all creatures of
routine I mean I'm so a creature of
routine so that means I really only have
to find 20 Foods I love that love me
back and I don't know in your
relationship if you've ever been in love
that was bad for you if you've ever had
a bad relationship
but I have
and I'm not doing it again and I'm damn
sure not doing it with food so because I
have control over that do I love this
and does it love me back I'm not going
to be in love with something that hurts
me I did The Daniel Plan Pastor Rick
Warren called me up and said I'm fat my
church is fat will you help me we
created a program uh for them Mark Hyman
and I did and thousands of churches
around the world had done it it's
awesome but one of the pastor's wives
came into my office and she said I told
my husband last night after you gave a
lecture that I'd rather get Alzheimer's
disease than give up sugar wow
I'm like did you date The Bad Boys in
high school because that's a bad
relationship wow and later we found out
she has a family history of Alzheimer's
and she's given up sugar but the
insanity around food is is crazy did
that that like actually makes me
emotional that's crazy it's crazy but so
many they're attached to you know at the
holidays this is how my mother loved me
so if I give this up it's like giving up
my mother and you really have to
understand the attachments to the
different foods they have but then get
them attached to new foods by showing
them it could be both delicious and
nutritious I was watching or listening
to a podcast that you did with somebody
and they were asking you like final
questions and they said what do you wish
you were better at or something like
that and you said
um the one thing I wish I could do was
get more people to change and I thought
God I so get that like I'm I totally
agree with you but I imagine it meaning
that you tell people hey this is what
you need to do like even your own father
for years like wouldn't listen and then
obviously he finally has his
breakthrough moment but
what have you learned in all of that to
get to the point where you have maybe a
better success rate than somebody else
even though still far too many people
would rather get Alzheimer's and can
actually say it out loud which is just
beyond crazy to me
um but where have you had successes with
that what are some takeaways that people
watching this can try to implement
because I I know it is true if even if
it's only me there are people watching
this that either they need to change or
maybe more importantly someone they love
needs to change and they just don't know
how to help them well if you want to
help someone else and my dad's story is
a great story you have to live the
message if you don't live the message
you suck as a messenger
and too many Physicians don't live the
message of health and so therefore
they're not good at changing behavior in
their patients and so they end up just
one medicine after the other which I
think is Bad Medicine
um so the first thing is you have to
live it and then you have to find smart
ways to get them interested so I start
and exercise with all of my patients
called The one-page Miracle so on one
piece of paper I want you to write out
what you want
what do you want in your relationships
in your work in your money in your
physical emotional and spiritual health
what do you want write it down
and then I want you to ask yourself does
your behavior get you what you want
because I realize Nobody Does it because
they should do it
um but they're more likely to do it if
it fits if it's their goal so I want to
live a long time because I love my
mission I love my wife I love my kids I
love my grandkids so you have to
understand
so why do you want to be healthy so that
really becomes primary so you live it
you get them into what their motivation
is and then you make it as simple as
possible is this good for my brain or
bad for it
start every day with today is going to
be a great day because then your
unconscious mind will find why it's
going to be a great day or end every day
with what went well today just to begin
to direct your mind so I find I have to
make it really simple and I have this
huge benefit I have pictures you know
thirty percent of the brain is dedicated
to vision and so I can show you here's a
healthy scan here's your scan I'm sort
of hoping you'll get some anxiety over
it right ramp up your anxiety so you do
better that's what I've seen I had this
one guy from the valley came to see me
and he was really his wife was concerned
he was really depressed and his brain
looked like he had Alzheimer's disease
and I'm like how much do you drink
and he's like I'm never drunk I'm like
that's not the question how much do you
drink and he was like having three
scotches a day whoa and he was
overweight and I added up the calories
that he was drinking a year at three
scotches a day it was 30 pounds of fat
he was putting on his body just from
those calories and but when he saw his
scan he got appropriately anxious
stopped drinking started with the bright
Minds habits and completely transformed
his life in six months wow that that is
really pretty extraordinary one thing
again you keep throwing out these little
nuggets that I find so interesting is
starting the day putting your feet on
the ground and saying this is going to
be a great day like these um the the I
call them soft things but they're so
powerful one thing you talked about that
I absolutely love is I forget the exact
phrase you use but basically to bathe in
happiness to just drink that in one why
is that important and then two how do we
actually do that well in my new book
um feel better fast and make it last
which I'm really excited about is
there's an exercise and feel better fast
it's about flooding all five of your
senses at once with happiness I mean
that's why you have senses it brings the
world in well why not bring it in in a
happy way rather than in a terrifying
way so they're visual things like images
of nature although on my phone it's like
here are my favorites and I can just go
to it and it makes me happy because it
triggers happy memories for me
um listening to sounds of nature like
the rain or the ocean or certain music
like for me it's Good Vibrations from
The Beach Boys
um what are the scents what are the
touches what are the tastes the smells
that can trigger happiness so vanilla of
all things honeysuckle Jasmine have been
found in scientific studies to trigger
happiness see I actually think we carry
memories from other people
uh genetically in the book you talk
about how you can train a mouse to be
afraid of a cherry blossom tree for
three generations which is crazy is that
what you mean or are you talking about
something else yeah my grandfather for
example
when he was 19 he came from the Middle
East came to Los Angeles his brother who
was a bad driver borrowed his sister's
car and was killed in a train accident
and he's 19. my grandfather never drove
because that anxiety got solidified in
his brain and that happened before he
was involved in making my father and so
the anxiety I carry may not just be mine
that it may actually come from the
experiences of generations that I think
a lot of it didn't start with me
um and so we know for example children
of Holocaust Survivors have a higher
incidence of PTSD 30 percent of children
of soldiers from Iraq and Afghanistan
who had PTSD 30 percent of their
children had PTSD they call it secondary
PTSD and so I think of these as
ancestral Dragons It's like what's the
issue that actually may not be your
issue and so I think it's really
important for you to know about your mom
and your grandma and your grandfather on
her side and your dad and their
ancestors because it's not just the
genes we inherit it's the scratches on
them that turn on or off those genes
that make anxiety depression
much more common in future Generations
so for example the end of mental illness
is dedicated to my two nieces Amelie and
Alize they're 10 and 15 and
they have mental illness throughout
their whole family
family history of suicides multiple
suicides anxiety depression bipolar
disorder addiction borderline
personality criminal Behavior but genes
only load the gun it's what happens to
us that pulls the trigger and
unfortunately they were raised in chaos
with
parents who suffered with depression
addiction domestic violence they had
multiple moves and so the whole idea
behind the end of mental illness is how
do I end it in these girls and in their
babies and grandbabies and what you do
is you put their bodies and their brain
in a healing environment so we work on
the actual physical functioning of their
bodies and
um Alize when I scanned her at 13 her
brain looked terrible and was that
because her mom drank when she was
pregnant was it because they lived in a
mold-filled home what I don't know but
repairing that is absolutely essential
to her doing well in school for her
picking a good partner for her and not
continuing the cycle of psychiatric
problems the truth is hitting your
career goals is not easy you have to be
willing to go the extra mile to stand
out and do hard things better than
anybody else but there are 10 steps I
want to take you through that will 100x
your efficiency so you can crush your
goals and get back more time into your
day you'll not only get control of your
time you'll learn how to use that
momentum to take on your next big goal
to help you do this I've created a list
of the 10 most impactful things that any
High achiever needs to dominate and you
can download it for free by clicking the
link in today's description alright my
friend back to today's episode so what
are the the sort of Baseline things we
do you talk about diet in the book not
being addicted to Flaming Cheetos
anymore what are some of the the things
that you did to help them out so for
Alize I mean first it starts with
feeding them right
and then supplementation multiple
vitamin fish oil Optimizer vitamin D
level put gave her a brain boost that
has seven different things to optimize
brain function
um
put her in a hyperbaric chamber that
made a big difference for her barbaric
oxygen is really intriguing for people
that don't know what it is walk them
through what it does and why it's useful
so I've published a number of studies on
it and probably I have a thousand
patients with scans before and after and
the reason it's like why do I care I'm a
psychiatrist why do I want to put you in
hyperbaric chamber that puts you under
pressure with increased oxygen because
it increases blood flow to the brain
well for Alize she had low blood flow
and so she had about 40 Dives so about
40 hours in a hyperbaric chamber I'm in
a new docu-series with Justin Bieber and
the hyperbaric chambers all over the
docu-series about him getting zipped in
and zipped out because when I scanned
him initially had really low blood flow
to his brain and he feels less anxious
because he has better blood flow to his
brain and so that was one of the
cornerstones for Alize and then I teach
her
anomaly the little one not to believe
every stupid thing they think this is
really important so we talk about
hardware and software optimize the
physical functioning of your brain and
you do it by going after all the risk
factors blood flow being one of them but
then as you optimize the physical
functioning she's got a lot of bad
programming because she grew up in chaos
and Chaos gives you sort of a
hyperactive emotional brain and your
brain automatically goes to the dark
place and so every morning
um we say today is going to be a great
day why because then your unconscious
mind will find well why is today going
to be a great day I got to hang out with
you so that makes me happy at the end of
the day we always talk about well what
went well
today it's training your mind but also
setting up your dreams to be more
positive and if your dreams are more
positive you'll be in deeper REM state
which is a more healing state for your
dreams that's so simple but really
really powerful this is something as
you're talking is like I know some of
this stuff and even that one like
setting that intention before I go to
bed would be better than what I'm doing
now which is just sort of tumbling into
bed and going to sleep and it's so cool
because you're probably like me and
you're just busy and you have a lot to
do and you want to accomplish a lot and
so my days just go so fast
and when I close my eyes and go what
went well today I begin to remember
these phenomenal touch points that I
just sort of breezed over
and I I love that and then I have a
little tiny habit
um
I worked with Professor B.J Fogg for six
months on creating tiny habits for brain
health and the mother tiny habit is
before you do anything before you say
anything you just ask yourself is this
good for my brain or bad for it and if I
love myself which I do I'm going to make
better decisions so is this good for my
brain or bad for it if you can answer
that question with information and law
your brain's going to be better yeah
it's one of those it's really simple and
not a lot of people do it give me some
more on the tiny habits you pepper them
throughout the book but what are some
other tiny habits that either you use or
you've got your nieces using
so if the first one is just is this good
for my brain or not what are some others
whenever you feel sad mad nervous or out
of control write down what you're
thinking
and then ask yourself if it's true
and there's a whole process in the book
to not believe every stupid thing you
think
and then when you go to say something to
your wife
or at work does it fit
there's an exercise actually in all of
my books basically called the one page
Miracle on one piece of paper write down
what you want
your relationships your work your money
your physical emotional spiritual health
what do you want I think everything
starts with what do you want
and then
does your behavior get you what you want
so for example with my wife I want a
kind caring loving supportive passionate
relationship I always want that I don't
always feel like that sometimes I'll get
a rude thought in my head I'm having a
bad day or she didn't do she not great
about closing cabinet doors and and I've
come to believe I would so much rather
have her in this house with the cabinet
door open than have her not there so I
like Let It Go because being a jerk
doesn't fit the goal I have for my
marriage but it starts with telling your
frontal lobe so that's the front third
of your brain largest in humans than any
other animal by far this is what makes
us human but you have to tell it what
you want so over time you match your
behavior to gut what you want so it
starts with that and then does it fit
I love that idea of telling your brain
what you want especially if I'm talking
to an entrepreneur
they don't know what they want so they
have like a vague idea
but they don't really know the specifics
of what they want and my thing is if you
want to get somewhere if you're really
trying to accomplish something the
amount of hard work of practice of
learning that you're going to have to do
is really pretty extraordinary
but if you're not aiming that at the
right thing then you're never going to
make progress and so everything you're
trying to accomplish in your life has to
be so clear that it boils down to
something that you can do right now
today
do you have a process for people for
that is it as simple as just writing it
down like how do you walk people through
the idea of getting that level of
clarity in their life so I have
virtually all of my patients start with
the one-page Miracle on one piece of
paper and so as we do therapy over time
it's does it fit you know does the food
you're eating does the thoughts you have
do your relationships fit ultimately
your purpose and all good businesses
have plans they have business plans and
they have goals and they have quarterly
priorities and so on but very few people
ever do that
for themselves and when I first did it
in 1986 I think it just helped me so
much clarify because you know I'm in
clinics and brain MD are two companies
um I didn't even imagine it back then
but it's consistent effort over a long
period of time you end up doing
something special you've written so many
books on the topic given so many talks
and shows you've done on PBS I mean it
this is a really big topic how do you
help people that feel overwhelmed that
don't know where to start they don't
know how to keep going
how do you give them that entry point
well that's why I write you know and
that's why we have a clinics it's we
want to coach them through it and people
go I can't afford to come to the clinic
well get a book you can get it at the
library
there's so much free things online
because our goal if we're really going
to end mental illness the end of mental
illness begins with a revolution in
brain health talk about this concept if
I was an evil ruler how would I create
mental illness in America we are
creating It in America by the food we
serve by the news that is everywhere
sort of the toxic pit you against me
news Cycles social media
letting kids hit soccer balls with their
head having Girl Scouts Girl Scouts
selling poison uh you're talking about
cookies I assume cookies yeah and last
year alone nicotine use among teenagers
went up 36 so Jewel
is an evil ruler strategy it's yeah I
mean they have bubble gum flavor
vaping devices that's directed at
children hello
um
we need to be more thoughtful talk to me
more about toxins so definitely
obviously tobacco marijuana alcohol like
those are ones that I think most people
although I love what you say alcohol is
not a health food it's not I think that
one may need to be said more but there's
someone I don't think anybody thinks
smoking is good for them but what are
some of the things that are problematic
that we might not be aware of like
firefighters that was one because of the
flame retardant in the clothing that I
I've only recently heard people start
talking about what are some toxins that
people are getting on a daily basis that
they might not realize is a type of
pesticides for example virtually all
with corn is raised with pesticides
virtually all the soy beans are raised
with pesticides and why don't you want
food raised with pesticides because you
ingest the pesticides and they begin to
damage your microbiome so I don't know
if you had a lot of antibiotics when you
were young but kids who had a lot of
antibiotics when they're young they're
anxious because it's damages their
microbiome what antibiotics kill bugs
and so you have these hundred trillion
bugs in your gut if you're damaging them
well we've seen that goes with anxiety
one of the toxins people don't know
about but clearly in the medical
literature is anesthesia children who
have anesthesia have a higher incidence
of learning disabilities and add and
adults who have anesthesia especially
around heart procedures have a higher
incidence of dementia I mean who thinks
about that it's like I need surgery I'll
just get surgery now often you need to
get the surgery but then you need to
rehabilitate your brain as if you played
in the NFL not for everybody but for
some people mold exposure
so you and I both know Dave asprey Dave
got scanned about 14 years ago this
brand looked like crap and he found he
was living in a mold-filled home and 12
years later his brain's much better
because I mean I think he's basically
dedicated his life to creating brain
health in other people and so if we're
going to do a quick rundown of what
those things are that they would do to
heal and rehabilitate the brain so we
talked about some so hyperbaric oxygen
may be extreme but certainly they can do
that get their diet right sleep is going
to be huge ending any social social
isolation that you have connecting to
people what are some other don't be fat
that is straight to the point don't be
fat
um I come from fat people
why is it a problem
I it actually would be 11 major risk
factors that steal your mind if you're
overweight you now have five risk
factors
um the fat on your body is not your
friend it
stores toxins so that's one risk factor
it increases inflammation that's another
risk factor I published two studies that
show as your weight goes up the blood
flow to your brain goes down which
should scare the fat off anyone yeah
that's three and
it takes healthy testosterone belly fat
and it flips it it transforms it into
unhealthy cancer promoting forms of
estrogen
that's four and then being overweight is
five and when you're overweight your
blood sugar often goes up as well and
that's part of being overweight so it's
just like when I first figured it out I
always carried like 20 extra pounds
um I lost the weight because I'm not
going to shrink my brain right I'm never
going to do anything I know purposefully
to hurt myself why and it's like oh
you're too uptight it's like no it's
because I love myself why would I ever
do something to hurt me unless I was
sort of an idiot and I know that sounds
harsh but now that you know we need to
be eating in a way that's calorie smart
and loaded with vegetables there is a
linear correlation to the number of
fruits and vegetables you eat a day and
your level of happiness but the brain
you'll like this
the brain does what you allow it to do
and so whatever habit or whatever
Behavior you engage in you're going to
do again and so bad habits they get
stuck in your brain just like good
habits get stuck in your brain so it
just takes some retraining so for
example when I sit down at a restaurant
and they come always you want alcohol
and they just drop bread on the table so
I'm like no to the alcohol because if
you drink alcohol before a meal you're
actually going to order more food and
you're more likely to order dessert and
no to the bread why because it's a
simple carbohydrate that quickly turns
in your mouth it starts turning to sugar
and it boosts a chemical called
serotonin in your brain which makes you
happy but it drops your frontal lobes
making you more likely to order more and
dessert and so as soon as the waiter
comes I'm like no on the alcohol alcohol
take the bread away and now it's just an
automatic response where the first
couple of months of it it was hard my
brain had to actually make new
connections to say here's a situation
say no so speaking of the brain if it's
always listening what is it always
listening to and what is this idea of
dragons that you talked about in the
book I find this really useful
well your brain is always listening it's
listening to your past it's listening to
the food you eat it's listening to
marketers it's listening when you say
it's listening to your past is it
listening to what you say about your
past or are you using listen as sort of
an umbrella for
reliving
the past for many people is always
present for them and I got this idea of
dragons from the past that still breathe
fire on your emotional brain so I was
doing a podcast with Dr Sharon May who's
a friend of mine relational therapist
and she started talking about dragons
from the past that were ruining
relationships and then she and I started
collaborating it's like well let's
identify the dragons and we came up with
13 of them and a couple the pandemic
just exploded like the Death dragon or
the grief and loss Dragon
um but my whole life I was living with
the invisible
abandoned or insignificant Dragon one of
seven I was in the middle my second son
in a Lebanese family which means you're
Expendable
which turned out to be beautiful because
I didn't have to go on the grocery
business right and Lebanese families the
oldest child the oldest male child goes
in the business and is your brother
still in the business my brother is the
president of the business wow I don't
think I'd ever heard you talk I mean
your dad was really successful in the
business that he built I didn't realize
just how much sort of
I guess ended up not being familial
pressure for you but certainly would
have been for your brother well it's
pressure when you grew up with a dad
that's very successful he ended up being
the chairman of the board of a four
billion dollar company wow
um you often just go like I can never
live up to that and so you're struggling
in that comparison which is actually the
second dragon the inferior flawed dragon
and I had that one in Spades you know
being short and second and
um
you know help me in so many ways right
the dragons have downsides but they also
have upsides if you have Felts
insignificant well I've built a life
based on being significant and it sort
of worked so how do you help people
reconcile that like when I when I read
the book I'm hearing about these dragons
they mostly sound negative but you in
terms of if they go unchecked your
prefrontal cortex is offline it really
does become pathological and it becomes
a problem but I'm obsessed with this
idea that there's pathology on both
sides so if you have too much drive it's
going to spill into pathology you know
if you're feeling too broken too
inadequate whatever but if you don't
have enough there's also pathology on
that side how do you help people walk
that balance is it the prefrontal cortex
that's always this balance between your
prefrontal cortex so think of that as
the break in your brain but you don't
want it too strong when it works too
hard people have OCD it's sort of like
the break is always on and so if you
think of a car like I like going to Big
Bear and think about coming down the
hill you need a good prefrontal cortex
you need a good break because if the
Brake's not on you die because you go
off a clef which is apropos people don't
break their behavior and they make bad
decisions and so they die early but if
the break is always on
you can't get down the hill either
because it's like stop stop stop stop
stop stop think of people have OCD so
it's about balance between the front
third of your brain prefrontal cortex
and your emotional brain because we need
passion we need purpose we need a reason
to do something but if it works too hard
we get sad or we get too anxious or we
come traumatized the wounded dragons
just so common way more common now since
the pandemic wounded dragon is I am
broken in some way or something it's
I've had trauma okay and I tell literal
stories of
and if we live in it was so hard for me
but when I was little I had this
beautiful white Goat Who
Um was our pet sugar yeah and
um I actually have this video I did a
public television special on the new
book and I actually showed the video of
me when I'm five
playing with sugar insurers kissing me
and it was just beautiful but sugar also
liked my dad's roses and so one day
sugar went off to the farm which means
sugar got slaughtered right and a couple
of nights later my dad and his brother
were joking that they were feeding us
sugar for dinner which
was incredibly traumatic for me and
years later were you at this point
like six five or six
and I mean I and I remember it like it's
yesterday
but years later I was in Monterrey
Mexico giving a big talk and they have
goat meat for sale
in Street vendors like we don't do that
in the United States right and as I
walked by
I got flooded with that memory and all
of a sudden I'm 43 or something have a
panic attack wow because the past
is always connected to the present and
so if there's trauma learning how and I
talk about this in the book how to
recognize it and disconnect from it
okay so that's recognizing it
disconnecting doing the unwinding is a
tall order before we get to that can you
what are some of the most common dragons
and if you have one of these running
rampant in your life your prefrontal
cortex isn't putting the brakes on it
what what does that manifest as in in
the more common dragons
well so we've had over a hundred
thousand people take the quiz know your
dragons.com so people can do that it's
free and
[Music]
on average people have six of them so
it's common to have issues and the
anxious dragon is the most common the
responsible Dragon where you feel like
you have to take care of other people
which actually can breed this thing
called codependence and entitlement and
others you have to be careful with that
the wounded Dragon the inferior flawed
dragon is very common and it's basically
I compare myself to you in a negative
way
um social media is driving that epidemic
um
and the Death Dragon sort of surprised
me but you know we did the study during
covid and is it a fear of death it's the
fear of death dragon
and a lot of people haven't come to
grips
with death
like one of the strategies I have
actually played out today is write down
10 good things about dying whoa and
um it's like oh well that's okay because
if it's inevitable it is right it's it's
like you have to learn to embrace it and
there's a lot of writing exercises in in
the book because I actually want people
to write their story and give it the
ending they want and then ask themselves
every day then kick in your prefrontal
cortex is my behavior getting me what I
want because too often people go for
fixes that fail rather than fixes that
fix
okay so first we're going to identify
our Dragon okay so I have the fear of
death Reagan or I have the anxiety
dragon as somebody who suffered with the
anxiety dragon that one's very easy for
me to relate to okay so I have the
anxiety Dragon I'm obsessing about a
future that I'm practicing the failure
unintentionally this was my thing I
would find my what I thought of as exit
ramps like if this situation becomes
problematic what's my exit ramp but in
thinking about all of my exit Rams I was
rehearsing it going wrong wrong wrong
wrong wrong
and
when I'm journaling the idea I want to
bring together with this so I I identify
my dragon but now when I'm doing the
journaling how do I get to Accurate
thinking because the problem in the
first place is that I have a cognitive
distortion I have a a tendency to think
of how the things could go wrong or at
least that felt like the right way to
plan for the future I've since stopped
doing that
um
how do you recognize what accurate
thinking actually is and you go through
this in the book because you you have
that like four questions that you have
people do I think it was four and
there's a part in there where they would
often say like I'm gonna fail are you
gonna fail yes like to them that seems
self-evidently true so how do you help
them recognize that that isn't actually
accurate
like help them question it whenever you
feel sad or mad or nervous or out of
control write out what you're thinking
and then it's five questions but it's is
it true
is it absolutely true with a hundred
percent certainty and that's the one
that usually cracks it it's like um
worthless
is it absolutely true now you're getting
thoughtful it's like well I'm a mother
and I'm a sister and I'm a daughter
and no it's not absolutely true it's
ridiculous
the third question is how do I feel when
I believe I'm worthless
[Music]
dad
withering
sad lonely
and the fourth question is who would I
be without the thought or how would I
feel if I didn't have the thought the
most common answer to that one is free
and then you flip it around to the
opposite it's like I am worth something
or I have worked and then give me an
example
or two or three or four and you have to
do that exercise at least a hundred
times to begin to retrain your automatic
response I mean I've been teaching
people to kill ants for a long time
automatic negative thoughts but I just
found these five questions they're just
so elegant
to just have a dialogue with yourself
I'll never be successful or I won't have
enough money or my life has no meaning
it's like well let's put that under a
microscope
not positive thinking accurate thinking
okay so putting myself in the shoes of
somebody that's trapped in one of these
dragons my gut instinct and you've done
this so much more than I have but my gut
instinct is the part that they're going
to struggle with the most is they're
going to say the opposite right so I
have worth I have value it just isn't
going to feel true or it's going to feel
true at such a low rung level like yes
okay fine I have some value but Jesus is
it enough to be worth everything that
I'm going through I find that people are
so ill-equipped to accurately identify
what their abilities are their
capabilities their worth their value all
that but I'm like don't even worry about
what's true ask yourself what's useful
and if it's useful to tell yourself I'm
a good person I have worth and that gets
you moving towards doing the things that
are actually Worthy
then we're going to do it
does that make sense to you or do you
think there's something better well well
not better I like it it's with each of
the dragons in the book
I have their origin story so where did
they come from
what's the upside because all the
dragons have upsides my abandoned
invisible and insignificant Dragon had
tremendous upside for me
um
how do you tame it so it's more than
just correct your thinking
to their strategy so for for one seeking
significance
well that's useful and it could be
voluntary in a church it you know
whatever fits your definition internally
of significance and then I have
meditations around each of them
um
so think of that as foundational like
the wounded Dragon for example I talk
about EMDR I movement
desensitization and reprocessing and
it's so powerful it's when you're
traumatized it actually gets stuck in
your brain and we see a pattern we call
it the diamond pattern in the brain so
your emotional brain gets turned on and
it can't go back to normal or healthy
and EMDR they actually have you bring up
the trauma while they get your eyes to
move back and forth and it settles it
down so as an example 1996. so I've been
doing Imaging for 30 years the first 20
years it was like
a horror film in my life because I was
getting picked on and I mean I had the
New York Times pick on me the Washington
Post
and my colleagues calling me bad names
and I'm like I just want to look at the
brain what's your problem
um and in 1996 I had the state of
California's Medical Board investigate
me yeah I've never heard that before
it's crazy that was traumatizing and I
couldn't sleep and one of the original
EMDR trainers worked for me and I walked
into Jennifer lendl's office in my
clinic and I'm like you need to help me
after an hour of this treatment I was
absolutely fine if they took my license
from me I could get a job I could take
care of my family I was going to be fine
but you can just imagine you'd spend
a big chunk of your life trying to do
what you do and now someone's trying to
take it away from you why does the
lateral eye movement shift the brain so
profoundly that you go from I can't
sleep this is a total mess to one
session and now I'm good
I think it's more than just eye movement
there's another technique that's
somewhat similar that's a part of the
same technique it no
but it's similar it's called havening
okay and but they're both
bilateral hemisphere stimulation
so for example
um off camera we talked about how my dad
died last year and a couple of days
after he died
um
in a random stack of papers I'm at my
mom's house just helping her organize
things is a picture of my dead dad in
the mortuary and I'm like what idiot
because it just bothered me and I
noticed it was just bothering me
throughout the day you know I'd see the
picture and I'd be irritated and
and then I'm like oh you help people who
have this problem and havening is
bilateral hemisphere stimulation so it's
either rubbing your hands like this
while you think of the trauma
um it's rubbing your face probably not
cool in a pandemic
um or what my favorite thing is and I do
this a lot with my patients is I have
them hold their shoulders and then rub
down to their forearms and they do it
for 30 seconds and the idea is to get
stimulation on both sides of your body
on both sides while you bring up the
trauma do you have to do it yourself or
can someone else do it for you either
way and people can learn about it at
havening.org like Safe Haven
havening.org and so I did that with the
picture and you rate it like on a scale
of one to ten and it was like a nine I
was pretty irritated by this and after I
did it for 30 seconds it's like a four
and then after I did it again the
irritation was gone I did it two more
times for 30 seconds and I fell in love
with the picture because it was
the last picture of my dad on Earth and
so
there are techniques
so that you don't have to live with
trauma spinning
in your brain whether it's EMDR other
people do tapping which can be helpful
or havening
I want to speculate about why that's
working so when I meditate what's useful
about meditation the only times that it
works for me are when I can really lock
into the pleasure cycle of the breath so
I have to be thinking about
optimizing the pleasure of each part of
the breath by doing that I really pull
my brain to like what is happening right
here right now
one it helps because it's truly when
you're breathing in a meditative way it
just feels good like purely
hedonistically it just feels good and
then my mind can't wander to whatever is
freaking it out because I'm there in my
breath and I'm wondering if this is a
there's something about stimulating both
sides of the brain that's the important
part or if this is just your focus is
now locking in on the sensation of being
touched or touching yourself and that
disrupts because I I think a lot about
pattern interrupting that you're just
hitting the brakes on this runaway
thought and by touching yourself by
tapping by whatever that you you're
grounding in a physical sensation which
stops your brain from thinking about the
traumatic thing
that's sort of bullet point one but
bullet point two is that you fell in
love with the photo but let's take these
one at a time do you think is it the
bilateral activation of the brain that's
critical or is it just the focus
I think it's a bilateral hemisphere
stimulation because a lot of times
people will bring up drama and focus on
it and it doesn't make them feel any
better it makes them feel worse but I
did a study on EMDR we took police
officers who were involved in shootings
and they developed PTSD and couldn't go
back to work and
I scan them and then I scan them during
their first EMDR session so while the
therapist was bringing up the trauma and
the scanning them in that moment before
you scan them after it in that moment
and so okay before you go lights up
they're emotional what what does it look
like when their ptsd'd out so when they
have PTSD if you look at the scans I do
it looks like a diamond pattern where
they're limbic or emotional brain is
more active compared to a healthy brain
and then in that trauma activation it
gets bigger gets more intense but after
they did an average of eight sessions
calmed it down and
that psychological intervention had
biological effects
okay so that all makes sense
now when I'm stroking myself
I am recalling the memory
I'm activating bilaterally my brain I
don't understand why that breaks the
elevation of the emotion
why yeah and I'm not sure we know why we
just know it does it was actually
discovered by Francine Shapiro when she
was in Menlo Park that when she looked
left and then right and did it over and
over again what she was upset about
didn't upset her as much and it was
really from that moment she's then
started working with
soldiers from the VA and did she comment
on why she did it the first time was it
accidental it was accidental so
intriguing okay yeah and now we have
other groups like The Haven and group
there's another group called brain
spotting but they all seem to be
bilateral hemisphere stimulation tools
to bring up the trauma and sort of suck
the
emotion
out of it so you still remember it you
know I still remember being investigated
by the medical board
but I don't get freaked out do you tell
yourself a new story so you pull so one
of the things I find Most Fascinating
about memory is that every time you pull
it into your working memory
you're affecting it and so you can
change the tenor of that memory the
emotional Resonance of that memory as
you hold into working memory and then
store it back so as you're doing this
you're doing the havening you're or the
bilateral eye movement or both you're
pulling the memory forward are you
to optimize the process do you need to
tell yourself a different story about it
do you need to focus on the positive
things that came out of it I mean you
talk about being able to find positives
and death is that what we're doing or
you literally just need to think about
it in the normal way that you always
think about it in your I'm sure
obsessive way but as long as you're
doing that bilateral contact it's going
to lower the emotion for many people
that's exactly what happens
um other people not so much and so then
you have to go what else is going on and
do they have a hurt pre-fernal cortex so
a lot of the soldiers that we work with
the PTSD and traumatic brain injury
people just didn't focus on the fact
that they were around three IED blasts
and so when things don't work like you
hope they would that's where the Imaging
work I do becomes so helpful what is up
my friend Tom bilyu here and I have a
big question to ask you how would you
rate your level of personal discipline
on a scale of one to ten if your answer
is anything less than a 10 I've got
something cool for you and let me tell
you right now discipline by its very
nature means compelling yourself to do
difficult things that are stressful
boring which is what kills most people
or possibly scary or even painful now
here is the thing achieving huge goals
and stretching to reach your potential
requires you to do those challenging
stressful things and to stick with them
even when it gets boring and it will get
boring building your levels of personal
discipline is not easy but let me tell
you it pays off off in fact I will tell
you you're never going to achieve
anything meaningful unless you develop
discipline right I've just released a
class from Impact Theory university
called how to build Ironclad discipline
that teaches you the process of building
yourself up in this area so that you can
push yourself to do the hard things that
greatness is going to require of you
right click the link on the screen
register for this class right now and
let's get to work I will see you inside
this Workshop from Impact Theory
University until then my friends be
legendary peace out okay so now let's
talk about the second fascinating
element here so we understand how to
lower the emotional resonance
but how did you fall in love with that
photo it so even when you retold it to
me it sounded like a change in story
that you went from that's a photo of my
father's death to that's the last photo
of somebody that I loved and cared about
is that a narrative shift that's
required to get that new emotional
anchor or or the
the association with that physical
sensation is pleasant and therefore it
paints that new emotion on an old memory
so part of it is skill
um my children get horrified if I want
to watch Pollyanna one of my favorite
movies ever Pollyanna teaches people to
play the Glad game whatever situation
you're in what is there to be glad about
in this situation so I've trained my
brain to do that over time and when you
take the emotion out something's going
to replace it and if you have skill in
managing your mind you'll often look for
what's right rather than what's wrong
and and I've worked really hard on that
because it wasn't my nature growing up I
was pretty anxious and I was masterful
at predicting what's the worst thing
that could happen and then I'd make it
worse so it doesn't know it Hallmark of
people that have panic attacks
um but I've worked really hard and it's
the blessing of my job I get to help
people and in that I always help myself
okay so we need to identify what our
dragons are we need to engage our
prefrontal cortex to make sure that we
pump the brakes on that stuff we need to
reframe things get good at the Glad game
the Pollyanna game whatever we're going
to call that right we need to engage
with reality so how are things really
instead of trying to run or hide from it
both the good and the bad so don't over
think you're a loser failure whatever
um yeah it's completely not helpful
because negative thinking
disrupts brain function but at the same
time too positive of thinking you could
be driving down the freeway at 125 miles
an hour in the rain I mean
Positive Thinking by itself is harmful
that we have to be thoughtful
careful right and that's the prefrontal
cortex there's a whole chapter in the
book on the dragon Tamer and it's like
how do you tame this dragon thunder
um and you do it with having forethought
and judgment and impulse control which
means oh by the way you have to feed it
right there's a whole section in the
book on the scheming dragons which is
really how Society is stealing your mind
if you're scheming to make you worse
yeah like there's the holiday Dragon
right oh it's Thanksgiving let's eat
terribly right uh or it's Halloween or
Christmas you know we're going to
celebrate the birth of the baby Jesus by
eating terribly and hurting people it's
like how does that make sense and
there's a brand new 12-step program in
this book
uh because there's the addicted dragons
I talk about the bad habit dragons and
as I was writing that I'm like you know
the 12-step program for addiction
was written basically in the 1930s and
there's not one Neuroscience step in the
12 Steps it's mostly psychological
social and spiritual and I'm like well
if a neuroscientist rewrote the 12 steps
what would he add
that step one in the traditional 12
steps is admit your life is out of
control
and I'm like no that's step two step one
is what do you want
relationships work money physical
emotional what do you want step two is
your behavior getting you what you want
if it's not then you need step three
which is get your brain right because I
really think better brain better
decisions better brain better
relationships better brain more money
better brain better life
how do we take a good brain and make it
great
well I love that idea it's really three
simple things and the first thing is you
have to care about it when I first
scanned myself in 1991 it wasn't good
and just the week before I scanned my 60
year old mother and she had a gorgeous
brain
and so I created brain Envy I wanted her
brain so here I am I'm a double board
certified psychiatrist so for people who
don't know what that means so I'm a
general psychiatrist and I have a
specialty in kids I'm a child in
adolescent psychiatrist I'm a physician
I'm highly educated and I don't care at
all about my own brain right I love
watching football on Sunday and and when
I saw my brain I'm like
ouch this can be better and so how do
you make it better well the second thing
is you avoid anything that hurts it and
I have a mnemonic we can talk about
called bright Minds it's if you want to
keep your brain healthy you have to
prevent or treat the 11 major risk
factors that steal your mind yeah so
um brain enemy got care avoid things
that hurt it do things that help it and
so what what have we learned that
exercise boosts blood flow to the brain
not believing every stupid thing you
think calms the anxiety centers in the
brain things like omega-3 fatty acids
get your gut right because your gut
makes most of the neurotransmitters in
your body well the little tiny habit for
brain health is before you go to make
any decision you ask yourself is this
good for my brain or bad for it and if
you love yourself because it's never
about should as soon as you think you
should do something you won't do it
um just because we're all four years old
and our head and rebellious it's you
answer the question in a positive way
because you love yourself because you
love yourself your wife your life your
mission
um that's why you do the right thing
because too often people go well I can't
have this and I can't have that and as
soon as you get into that deprivation
mindset
it's not going to work it's really
interesting to me how often the answer
that you push people towards whatever
their struggle is is something that I'll
call soft love comes up a lot attachment
not being lonely like things that you
would expect a psychiatrist to give you
a pill for you've traditionally shied
away from that obviously you speak it
can be very profound but that you're
leading people to do
um maybe easier or more basic things
first what are some of the like just
dead simple easy things that people
should be thinking about with protecting
the Brinks if they want to answer you
know I want to do something that's good
for my brain but they don't know what
that is like well so I went to my
daughter's second grade class and I put
20 things on the board and I went 20
things that are good for your brain just
just 20 things 10 of them were good 10
of them were bad and I'm go separate
them for me they got them all right
except one thing marijuana orange juice
really okay they put it in the good
category when in fact it's got way too
much sugar and whenever you unwrap sugar
from its fiber sores it turns toxic in
your body and so so is this good for my
brain or bad for it or is it good for my
child's brain or bad for it and they
come to you and they want to play
football where does that fall it falls
in the bad category brain is soft but
the consistency of soft butter your
skull is really hard and it has sharp
bony ridges no don't let them do that
and I had one billionaire he goes but my
son really wants to do it and I've hired
this you know NFL coach and I'm like oh
well if he told you he really wanted to
do cocaine would you go get him a dealer
because it's the same freaking thing
right because I have scanned you know we
have 150 000 scans on people from 120
countries and contact Sports damage the
brain about the same as cocaine whoa oh
I knew it was bad I didn't know it was
that bad
so and we talked before we started about
I tend to get myself in trouble and
about 10 years ago we started the
world's first and largest study on
football players on professional
football players and the level of damage
is sad
but 80 percent of them get better when
we put them on a rehabilitation program
so even if you've been bad to your brain
you can make it better and I can prove
it I've spoken to my audience about it
before but the thing that led me to you
is massive anxiety that seemed to be
getting worse by the day and one of the
things that helped me was crushing the
ants the automatic negative thoughts and
becoming a pattern interrupt and
stopping that walk people through some
of the things that aren't necessarily
because we'll get into diet but that
aren't diet related that are really just
the way that they allow themselves to
think whether it's the brain getting
stuck and looping around repetitive
negative things whether it's negative
thoughts that they never interrupt like
what are those things that really cause
people problems that they may not even
be aware of we have a brain health
assessment online people can go to brain
health assessment.com and I'll go which
of the 16 brain types do you have so let
me take just a step back and that'll
answer that question whenever I see see
someone so if you came to see me I'm
always thinking about the four circles
of your life so I'm thinking about your
biology so with anxiety my first thought
is areas in your emotional brain just
are working too hard and so it's driving
that anxiety so what's the biology
what's the psychology which is how do
you think and the environment that you
grew up in
what's the Social Circle because if
you're around a lot of irritated angry
negative people you're more likely to be
anxious and what's the spiritual Circle
um why do you care why you're on the
planet what's your deepest sense of
meaning and purpose so I'm always
thinking bio psychosocial spiritual and
that way I end up helping whole people
not just oh you're anxious to exam
because that's the quick answer that if
you go to Kaiser for example and I just
hired a doctor from Kaiser and he saw 25
patients a day so the 25 patient a day
answer is Xanax is let me give you a
benzo and the problem with it is once
you start it it's Insidious it changes
your brain to need it in order to feel
normal and so I'm like so how else can
we quell your anxiety so there's some
simple supplements like Gaba or one of
my favorites magnesium that can be
really helpful
but the psychological one there was one
day I
um was at work and I saw four suicidal
patients and that's hard for me and then
I saw two couples who hated each other
and two teenagers who ran away from home
and so at the end of the day I was worn
out and I came home home to an ant
infestation in my house and I'm cleaning
up thousands of ants and I'm like uh and
then it just hit me and
automatic negative thoughts
my patients are infested and the next
day I went to work with a can of ant
spray and I put it on my coffee table
and I'm like we need to help you get rid
of these things that are infesting your
mind and they liked that it was just
something they could grab onto so here's
the exercise whenever you feel sad
or mad or nervous or out of control I
just want you to write down what you're
thinking
and ask yourself if it's true
and I have
um a process I don't know if you want we
could do it together pick a thought any
thought you want to share and I'll teach
you how to put a stake in it
um this is never going to work
okay
so here are the five questions is it
true
it certainly could be true yeah but is
it true I can't say definitively
I don't know sure right yeah because I
am not a fan of positive thinking
I am not interesting positive thinking
kills way too many people
I'm a fan of accidents too many people
what do you mean
so they did a study at Stanford
1921 on 1548 10 year old children and
they followed them for 90 years looking
at what goes with success Health and
Longevity
and it wasn't the don't worry kids
it wasn't the Happy Kids
in fact the don't worry be happy kids
died the earliest from accidents and
preventable illnesses the kids who lived
the longest were the conscientious kids
the kids who said they're going to show
up at a certain time and they show up on
time the kids who got their homework
done the kids who were responsible who
actually had a bit of anxiety because
anxiety prevents you from driving at 125
miles an hour down the freeway in the
ray right you need some anxiety
obviously too much it makes people
suffer
so this isn't going to work out is it
true I don't know the second question
can you absolutely know with a hundred
percent certainty it's not going to work
out no no
third question how do you feel when you
believe the thought it's not going to
work out bad anxious do you feel
uncomfortable impending doom this sense
that you know it's overwhelming you
don't want to look at it you want to
turn away you want to go do things that
are fun that are just easy immediate
gratification eating the marshmallow
immediately that's sort of all at a
limbic level it's just emotion and then
how do you treat other people when you
believe the thought if I were to give
into it you're going to be grumpy or
grouchy or shorter with people or just
Sullen and quiet yeah so is it true I
don't know can I absolutely know that
it's true no how do I feel when I
believe the thought anxious worse I mean
it's fuel line the thing that makes you
naturally upset
fourth question is who would you be or
how would you feel if you didn't have
the thought if you couldn't have the
thought
certainly better for sure
and I'm gonna now I'm gonna start
pushing you because one I want this to
be useful in my own life and then two I
want people listening for it to really
be useful I find that there's a certain
point where the anxiety kicks over into
it feeling purely biological and what I
mean by that is I can't differentiate
between being cold and being anxious
they're the same physical Sensations so
I'm like am I just cold or is this an
exacerbation of the anxiety and so one
of the quotes that is just seemed so
true to me in my life and this isn't how
they meant it but this is um you'll
understand in a second why it's always
running so true the only thing to fear
is fear itself so the only thing that I
have to fear when it comes to public
speaking is anxiety it's like if I
didn't have to worry about the anxiety
I'm not worried about the performance or
the outcome I've done it so many times
and so before I go on stage I have to
meditate to calm everything down to slow
my breathing to get the blood back into
the right areas so in that situation
there's not
negative thoughts that are driving you
right so in the beginning I had to learn
to stop that loop from even starting by
killing that initial thought which is
why that was so powerful for me so
killing the answers by it's a biological
treatment too because when you believe
these negative thoughts it changes your
physiology immediately
um so
how would you feel if you didn't have
the thought better you son so the fifth
question is my favorite question it's
you take the original thought this will
not work out and you flip it
to the opposite to the exact opposite
not the narcissistic
opposite which is I will be the best
ever
um
so the opposite of it this will work out
you have any evidence that that's true
if you're thinking about
you know whatever the situation and you
won't work out historical performance
sure
just like once in your life or more than
once uh depending on what we're talking
about no it could be years of success at
something right somebody on my board
just this morning I'm dumb
and then when we switched it to I'm not
dumb and she had like 50 reasons why she
wasn't dumb right but if you don't
challenge your thoughts if you don't
question your thoughts you believe them
a hundred percent and then you act
out of the belief
so learning how to clean that up is
really important but sometimes they're
remnants of anxiety that are not driven
by the negative thoughts and their
diaphragmatic breathing is so important
so if I was you well and I used to be
you because before I'd speak
um I'd be very nervous and I was on the
speech team in college but I couldn't
hold paper in my hand because it would
shake it was like really irritating and
so I became masterful at diaphragmatic
breathing and it's super simple
um I put people in my office on the
floor put a book on their belly and I
teach them when you breathe in make the
book go up when you breathe out make it
go down the trick is Big breath
take twice as long to blow it out so
it's like three or four seconds in hold
it just for a second and then about
eight seconds out and that triggers a
parasympathetic response so you know the
difference between the fight or flight
response you have a sympathetic response
we're really anxious our hands get cold
so that's the cold connection they start
to sweat our muscles get tense our
breathing becomes shallow and fast which
is inefficient for the brain and you
just you want to run away or you want to
hit something
um
you want to trigger the opposite it's
called a parasympathetic response and
that breathing pattern will do it also
holding something warm will do it as
well and first for some people they'll
just put their hands under warm water
and if you could get in a sauna that's
great or getting a hot tub you can't do
that before you speak but
so what is like if somebody comes to you
I know you're going to say that you scan
the brain that gets a bit tough for
everybody watching at home but what are
like the the basic protocols for some of
the most typical things that you see is
it are you starting with diet are you
starting with exercise like how do you
get people to take the the sort of edge
off whatever they might be experiencing
well I'm usually working always in those
four circles so yes I'll scan them
because if I don't look I don't know but
not everybody can do it so and change
Your Brain Change Your Life I think
that's my book you read there's one of
the questionnaires that go oh well
you're more likely to have a limbic
issue here or basal ganglion an anxiety
issue with these symptoms or prefrontal
cortex issue which is so common for us
um
and then I'll go oh well if this is
likely the issue these are the
supplements I would think about
and I tend to start with supplements I
mean unless you're schizophrenic or your
brittle Bipolar person I generally start
with supplements first
um and so at home people could go to
brainhealthassessment.com find out which
of the 16 types they have and then we'll
work on the biology along with Biology
yes you should exercise of course you
should and there's certain kinds of
exercise especially coordination
exercises so Rocket Sports by far my
favorite very few head injuries but they
work your cerebellum and the cerebellum
I think of it as the Rodney Dangerfield
part of the brain it gets no respect
even though it's ten percent of the
brain's volume but has 50 percent of the
brain's neurons can you imagine
something that has half the brain's
neurons actually gets very little
coverage uh in the scientific media so
what is this cerebellum doing is it to
do with coordination and well that's
what they used to think yeah
coordination movement but now we know 80
percent of it is dedicated to cognition
and motion
and cognition in what way just like
General processing processing speed you
want to talk about something near and
dear to my heart I would love to be able
to process raw data faster that's how I
think of it
um I'm assuming then that's cerebellum
so I start playing table tennis that's
step one what else what am I
supplementing what other activities am I
doing
so a rocket sport if your wife likes
ballroom dancing become good at it
because it's a coordination exercise and
then you want
to stimulate it and there's certain
supplements that I actually like like
thinning because it helps you feel
relaxed but it really also helps you
focus and this is over the counter
rhodiola ashwagandha ginseng we actually
make something we like called focus and
energy and we find it stimulates your
frontal lobes and your cerebellum at the
same time
so and then stop hurting it alcohol is
directly toxic to the cerebellum I mean
that's why they make you try to walk a
straight line you can't because your
cerebellum is not working it's being
poisoned so I hardly ever drink what are
some other things that people do on a
day-to-day basis that could be totally
just horrific for that so if you're
playing football or your kids playing
football what they're doing is they're
banging their frontal lobes and there's
actually this really cool term I like
it's called cross cerebellar diaschesis
it's like what does that mean you hurt
your left frontal lobe it actually turns
off your right cerebellum and if you
hurt your right frontal lobe it turns
off the left cerebellum and if you're
heading foot soccer balls you're turning
off both sides of your cerebellum so we
just have to do so much better
protecting
the brain so with that insane string of
interactions with the brain how's that
given you a new way to think about
mental health how should we reframe it
what what does that taught you so I have
a new book coming out called the end of
mental illness and I realize that that's
going to get me into all sorts of
trouble
I love it but
after looking at the brain
I've come to realize these are not
mental illnesses at all that their brain
health issues that steal your mind and
when you really unpack this one idea it
just changes everything people begin to
see their problems as medical and not
moral it decreases shame and guilt it
increases compliance it increases
compassion and forgiveness because we
begin to see bipolar disorder
schizophrenia or major depression like
heart disease and no one is shamed for
it even though all of them have
lifestyle contributions what do you
think that the stigma came from like why
because dude it was not long ago where
mental health issues was really really
stigmatized I would say it's less now I
four years struggled with anxiety and
didn't want to tell my wife because I
thought she would think less of me where
do you think that all comes from
I I think it comes from the fact that we
don't think of these as brain health
challenges
mental illness places the emphasis on
your mind which is vague and hard to
Define
the mind is created by the brain and
when your brain works right you work
right but when your brain is troubled
for whatever reason
you have trouble in your life you're
more likely to be anxious you're more
likely to be depressed you're more
likely to have cognitive problems or get
the diagnosis of ADD
and if we don't ever look at the brain
then how do we care about it think about
this what other medical specialty
virtually never looks at the organ they
treat
and because we don't look at the brain
on a routine basis like we look at your
heart or your prostate or your breasts
nobody cares about their brain really
and and when you don't look at the brain
you come up with all sorts of
interesting theories about why people
act the way they do but you don't have
any information on the actual biology
and so for someone who struggles with
anxiety what we learned it's clearly not
one thing your brain could work too hard
and that's why you're anxious because
you can't settle it down or it doesn't
work hard enough so it can't suppress
the anxious feelings or maybe there's a
toxin or trauma and
most people with anxiety they go to a
therapist and they talk about what's
going on
and so they're working really on the
software of the issue but what if
there's a hardware
concern
I want to talk about the biology I think
this is really interesting and do would
I think you would self-identify as
religious yes you can have a church you
talk about church a lot
um how do you think about sort of
religion and that one-to-one tie between
the the physicality of the brain and the
mind
um there doesn't seem to be a conflict
for you where there is for a lot of
people yeah no not at all for me to
thank all of this evolved out of random
chance I think actually takes more faith
than believing in Creative Design I've
actually studied prayer and the impact
of prayer on the brains really
interesting tell me more go deep what do
you mean by that what is the impact so
we studied it in different states so
conversation States like different
brainwave States or different like well
we studied the brain in different prayer
States okay so for example I pray for
you
um it's very intentional very useful
versus someone who does prophecy which
is one of the gifts in both the New
Testament and the Old Testament we're
speaking in tongues which is a gift in
the book of Acts in the New Testament
it's really interesting because speaking
in tongues is basically your channeling
the Holy Spirit and I've actually
scanned channelers I mean people who
channeled the dead like the Long Island
Medium and other people and there's
research on channelers because you know
in the United States we go oh no that's
not real but in places like Brazil
half the population believes in it and
engages in those kinds of spiritual
disciplines
and so the theory was when you speak in
tongues or when you Channel you have to
drop the function in your brain so you
have to sort of drop the noise in your
brain to become a vessel for the channel
so give me give me some of the brain
waves so full disclosure I'm not
religious at all and I definitely will
count myself in sort of the deeply
skeptical but I accept that there are
things I do not understand but could you
look at a brain scan and know ah this
person's in a prayer state or a
meditative State like there are certain
things that you look for well you have
to compare it so for example for the
prayer study we did both spect which
looks at blood flow and activity and we
also did quantitative EEG which looks at
the electrical activity in the brain so
if you think of
Alpha States or Theta States Theta
States being more meditative State
although meditation fooled us you sort
of think oh when you meditate
your brain would get less activity and
that's true in your emotional brain but
in your thoughtful brain it fires up it
actually increases something called
gamma rays which are super fast waves
and so you have to sort of know where in
the brain you're looking so when we we
say brain waves what we're looking at is
how busy is your brain and we measure it
in something called Waves per second or
cycles per second and zero to two cycles
per second is called delta waves and
it's what happens when we sleep
um three to seven or theta waves sort of
daydreaming people have ADD have higher
levels of theta waves so they're often
in sort of a daydreaming state
Alpha Waves 8 to 12 cycles per second
and that people often train that to
become in a more meditative focused
state so I love hypnosis and I've done
it ever since I was a medical student
with my patients and so we almost think
we try to get them into an alpha State
and then beta is 13 to 18 and high beta
is above 18 and Gamma is above 40. and
so we can actually train your brain
maybe you need less Theta so you can
concentrate better and not be so
distracted or maybe we need to train up
Alpha and it's very exciting for me
because
I first learned this idea in medical
school first Do no harm use the least
toxic most effective treatment so I
would much rather do something like
nerve feedback for you than just start
you willy-nilly on medication but
unfortunately that's what's happening in
our society 85 percent of psychiatric
drugs are prescribed by non-psychiatric
physicians in 10-minute office visits
and and I'm not opposed to them I use
them when nothing else is working but
it's not the first thing I think about
and in the end of mental illness there's
a whole chapter on mind
medication versus nutraceuticals and
there's actually a table on which
supplements have a level scientific
evidence for things like insomnia
anxiety depression ADHD addiction
um
and and I'm pretty excited about that
all right let's go back to the
neurofeedback and meditation prayer like
how do we train ourselves to be in a
different state so I do a lot of
creative writing and there's just a
certain state that I think is an alpha
wave state but reading your breakdown in
the books it may be more of a Theta
state so I'll meditate for 15 to 20
minutes I am focused entirely on
diaphragmatic breathing so
I am trying to what I think of as lower
the background radiation so all of my
stress all of my anxiety I can get it to
zero and unless there's something really
weird going on in my life I can get it
to zero pretty fast like I said 15 to 20
minutes start diaphragm breathing sort
of all the worries and thoughts begin to
go away but you've got this
neurofeedback that people are using you
referred to it as a game on a computer
what are people doing how are they
getting the neurofeedback
do you need that can you get there
through prayer meditation like how do we
begin to shift gears well one of the
reasons I really like neurofeedback is
when people meditate
the only feedback they're getting is
from themselves and so when you have
instruments that can actually measure it
you have a better sense and then once we
know it and we have our goal whatever
that goal is more creativity more Focus
less anxiety irritability then we can
specifically set those training
protocols
and give you feedback to know where you
are
um and that's actually how I came to
Imaging was through a treatment
technique called biofeedback so
biofeedback we measure things like hand
temperature heart rate sweat gland
activity muscle tension breathing brain
waves and so we know your Baseline and
then we teach you so for example to warm
your hands and if I teach you to warm
your hands with your brain it's an
automatic relaxation response and so it
triggers something called a
parasympathetic response so if you think
of fight or flight is a sympathetic
response well it's the opposite of that
and so well how do you teach someone to
warm their hands so first you put a
little thermistor on their pinky and go
so what's your hand temperature and then
let's get and warming images and let's
see which one works for you and so we'll
write down 10 images that you might
think would work for you and then we'll
spend a couple of minutes on each image
and then you know over an hour you have
a pretty good sense one of you can do it
children do it without any problem
because they don't believe they can't
that is super interesting but um so it
could be holding a puppy or putting your
hands in front of a fire or holding a
cup of decaf coffee or it starts warming
people's hands up yeah and it when you
warm your hand it sends a signal to the
rest of your body
to calm down because when you get
stressed your hands get cold and they
get sweaty so when I was a young
psychiatrist I used to do a word
association test with my patients and I
would talk about well think of a pencil
and nothing would happen with their hand
temperature or think of your mother and
for me when I think of my mother my
hands get warmer because she's this
really good concept in my head but as
soon as you go think of your father my
hands get cold because we had a
conflicted relationship I mean he's
actually one of my best friends now but
it took a long time to get there
so your body
responds to every single thought you
have
and your brain responds and are they
helping you or are they hurting you and
you can learn to change your body
Often by changing where you let your
mind go I want to go back to hypnotism
so is there an element of that in this
uh and I think the first question we
have to answer is why is hypnotism
powerful
well it helps you tap into a natural
state are you are you shutting a part of
your brain down no actually we're
activating so that was like like with
meditation you know it sort of fooled us
yes it calms your emotional brain but it
activates your cortical brain the most
evolved human thoughtful part of the
brain
um hypnosis in the studies that have
done tends to activate the happy side of
the brain which is the left front in
people who are right-handed and we're
not talking about Las Vegas and making
people click like chickens and all of
that we are in hypnotic States all the
time so if I drove to Vegas and that
five hour drive seemed like it went by
in two
it's called highway hypnosis where time
gets distorted I don't know if you ever
like drove through a city and you're
like I don't remember driving through
the city but you did and you were
obviously fully awake and competent and
so on it's hypnotic state so I'm just
directing people into a natural state
because they're more open not more
gullible because you can't make people
do things they wouldn't do but I have
found it helpful for sleep it's helpful
for pain it's helpful for anxiety and it
just feels so good which is I think
because I had a lot of anxiety when I
was young I think I gravitated toward
these things because I teach my patients
because they also help me
yeah so the idea of hypnosis making you
open what made me think of that is you
were saying okay you can give people
these images they can actually begin to
warm their hands uh it made me wonder if
okay do we first have to train them to
light up that part of the brain that
you're calling the happy part which I've
never heard that reference before
um so is is that step one teach them to
light up the the part of their brain
that makes them more receptive so some
people are highly hypnotizable
that when you put them in a trans time
gets distorted very quickly and almost
everybody can be hypnotized but for some
people like me it's training you need to
do it not one time and think of it as
magic but do it over time and when you
put yourself when you do the
diaphragmatic breathing which I'm a huge
fan of you're actually beginning to put
yourself in hypnotic meditative state a
and then you can solve problems it's
just your whole physiology changes do
you practice like do you teach people
how to do self-hypnosis so if if a
meditative state is Hypnotic then I
would say okay it's simply focusing on
the breath returning sort of letting go
of the thoughts coming back to the
breath over and over and over
um is that sort of the Baseline entry
into this state or are there more
typical things that you'll have somebody
do like trying to warm their hands like
what's the easiest gateway to this and
then how do people use it
so we have an
online program called brenfit life and
there's actually six hypnosis audios I
do for them as if they were in my office
um so we begin to decrease the outside
world by focusing and then I'll have
people focus on something above their
eye level and as I count to 20 I'm going
to suggest to them their eyes are
getting heavy and about 12 their eyes
start to get heavy and I'll have them
close their eyes so we take their
scattered attention to a spot close
their eyes and then the attention gets
focused inward okay what's happening in
the brain what are you trying to do in
that first step what I'm trying to do is
decrease the noise
and then
I'm gonna do diaphragmatic breathing for
them or really initially deep breathing
if I hadn't already taught them
diaphragmatic breathing and there's a
specific rate I don't know if you've
ever played with this but three seconds
in
six seconds out because that raid has
been found to trigger a parasympathetic
response but I'm just getting them
focused on what's going on internally
and then I'll have them roll their
eyeballs up I'll have them basically
tense their muscles around their eyes
roll it down and then we're going to do
Progressive relaxation
I'll have them imagine the relaxation
spreading from little tiny muscles in
their eyes to their forehead to their
scalp all the way down to the bottom of
their feet and then I'll do a deepening
technique may have them walk down a
flight of stairs or something similar to
that and then we'll do guided imagery
I'll take them
apart to beach the mountains you know
whatever we decide on ahead of time that
is relaxing for them get them to see
what's there feel what's there smell
taste the freshness in the air and and
then we do the work
I had a 16 year old boy who had panic
attacks and I got him into a really nice
calm hypnotic State and then I had him
remember the last time he had a panic
attack that's interesting interesting
why they're exposure in a new so one
we're relaxed it's safe
and then in this safe meditative State I
would have had I went to you to imagine
yourself getting younger and smaller
smaller and younger
and I went to go to the first time you
had a panic attack
and after a minute he went back to when
he was four years old he had to say
stuck in his throat he thought he was
gonna die and someone did a heimlich
maneuver on him and it was very
traumatic for him and he completely
forgotten about it and then and this
doesn't happen often his mother was in
the room his 16 year old boy
and I'm like well is there anything
before this
because that was one of the sensitizing
events he actually went back to a time
when he couldn't see when it was dark
when he was wet and something was
choking him and his mother knew exactly
what happened he actually went back to
his birth and was born with the cord
wrapped around his neck I've never heard
anybody talk about goals before like I'm
obsessed with that and it just seems
like people don't bring it up uh but
here we go this is from the book you're
more likely to be able to protect
yourself from dragons and ants we've
talked about those when you have clear
goals a healthy blood sugar level plenty
of sleep no alcohol in your system and
you talk about marijuana as well which
would be nice and controversial you
don't mention it in this quote but you
have in the book and you are not hungry
angry lonely or tired and I thought that
really sums up
the protective mechanisms the things you
have to look out for and what you have
to do
walk people through why are goals so
important why is a guy that spent 40
years focused on brain health talking
about that and how did you come to
realize just how useful that is
you have to tell your brain what you
want because it's always listening and
if you don't know what you want and I
ask all of my patients what do you want
they'll talk about money
or they'll like I haven't
17 almost 18 year old daughter and she's
had two boyfriends and I've dismissed
them both but it's like what do you want
and they talk about money and I'm like
no that's a side effect of a meaningful
purposeful
life
having that is the goal is a terrible
goal and
I like money I always say to my team no
margin no mission right you have to make
money
but if that's the point that's the
prescription for unhappiness and I've
always
and I got this when I was a medical
student
it's
people get burned out when they become
unbalanced
and so when I ask my patients what they
want relationships
work
money and support but it can't be the
thing right physical emotional spiritual
health what do you want in a balanced
way because if you know then you're more
likely to get it
so for example
you've met Tana uh I want a kind caring
loving supportive passionate
relationship with my wife
I always want that
but I don't always feel like that
but when I'm thoughtful when I know my
goals because they're posted
I'm so much more likely to act like that
which means I'm going to have a great
marriage
especially if she has clear goals too
and we have similar goals for our
relationship
do you guys talk about your goals all
the time and when you say they're posted
where are they posted
so I have them posted in my bathroom
and I have them on my phone
very smart and and so everything it
comes out I love like three letter three
word sentences or three-word questions
and like for the ants is it true
and for goals is does it fit does my
behavior today fit the goals I have for
my life so last night I was at the
Orange County Fair they had fried butter
Puffs doesn't fit the goals I have right
because one of my goals is to be
physically healthy if you're trying to
change medical specialty you want to
live a long time because it's going to
take a long time and so I want to be
healthy because that gives me energy and
happiness and so the butter fried butter
Puffs didn't fit
yeah I think this is a a super
underserved
um thing it
it there's a great Tony Robbins quote if
you don't know where you want to be in
five years you're already there and I
remember when I heard that I was like oh
my God like so many people have dreams
about where they want to go and what
they want to do but they stay these sort
of vague amorphous blobs and they never
get defined and therefore you never
achieve them and your future is always
five years away and you're just you're
stuck in this Perpetual sameness so it's
really interesting to hear you talk
about that so now
let's say that they have their goal
they've written it down they posted it
they see it multiple places in their
house how do they go about getting the
brain that they're going to need to
actually get there so we know that we
don't eat our butter Puffs in fact what
I'll ask is why don't we eat our butter
Puffs we want to live a long time I get
that but specifically what what is the
problem with
fried butter yeah like what makes
something bad food I think that's the
right way to ask it
uh I come up with this new phrase I just
love so much
that you only want to love food that
loves you back that you're in a
relationship with food I think 30
percent of the mental health problems in
America are related to our terrible diet
that you are what you eat in large part
and if you're eating
I call them the weapons of mass
destruction highly processed pesticide
sprayed high glycemic low fiber
food-like substances stored in plastic
containers you're not going to be
healthy you poison your gut you're
poisoning your brain and I published
three studies now the last one on 35
000 scans one of the world's largest
Imaging studies
Tom you will not believe this there was
a linear correlation on virtually every
area of the brain as people's weight
went up the activity and blood flow in
their brain went down I believe it
healthy weight
overweight obese morbidly obese in a
linear fashion when I saw those graphs
when I was doing the research I was just
like horrified and I come from a family
of fat people my dad used to hate when
I'd say that I have a brother that's 150
pounds overweight and a sister is the
same thing and I know if I just ate
everything that looked good to me I
would be too and now I'm not having that
especially because I don't want a small
brain right right and and people go
that's fat shaming and I feel terrible
about it because 72 percent of the
country is overweight think about that I
mean how insane is that 42 percent of
people are obese the pandemic made it
worse
we should be worried about that because
the extra fat on your body produces
inflammatory cytokines and we know
inflammation is a major cause of
depression and dementia the fat on your
body takes healthy testosterone which we
need which men and women need and it
turns it into unhealthy cancer-promoting
forms of estrogen that's a bad thing
that stores toxins we need to get
serious about being in a healthy way
with healthy food
and so diet is critical exercise
supplementation I think is really
important I did a study 97 percent of
the population
low in omega-3 fatty acids and so
finding ways to supplement about 80
percent of us are deficient in vitamin D
yeah in a pandemic that's not okay nope
right because people with low vitamin D
actually die more if they get covered
19. so yeah going back to what you're
saying about fat shaming so first of all
I come from a morbidly obese family as
well and I've often said that you when
you love something you don't hate on it
look down on it like I don't think less
of people because they're obese but
going back to the idea of facing reality
at the same time I know that I will lose
them earlier than I absolutely have to
if they continue to live that lifestyle
and so getting people especially now in
a pandemic to just face that it isn't
fat shaming to say you're more likely to
survive this disease that's ravaging you
know the entire human population if you
are living a healthy lifestyle get your
weight under control exercise Eat Right
work out all of that stuff because
there's nothing worse than trying to
solve a problem when you ignore the
thing that's actually causing it like
you're just at that point it's really
about symptom mitigation versus figuring
out what's really going on
um
do you think that this so going back to
weight specifically I want to pick up on
that for a second because I learned a
long time ago as a psychiatrist if you
don't admit you have a problem you can't
solve it dude that is so true until I
finally admitted to my wife that I was
anxious I I couldn't make progress and
finally I just was like [__] I have to
tell her and it really did not make me
feel good about myself because you know
there is something about the way that
she would look at me like I could do
anything and that felt so good and to
finally be like yo I'm over here I am
struggling homie like this is really
gnarly and of course it wasn't the turn
off that I feared it was going to be and
it only brought us closer together but
that was really hard to admit but then
once I could say it out loud to the
person that was the only person I really
cared about impressing then it was like
okay now I can actually deal with this
because when you become more real
you become more relatable
and there's so many guys don't
understand this that they deny that they
have a problem because they want to be
perceived as the person who has it all
together but then nobody can relate to
you
um you know that's one of the reasons it
became really vulnerable in the book and
I haven't gotten any haters I mean I
have plenty of haters don't get me wrong
but from writing for that from on that
stand
um
but I remember when I did the big NFL
study at a time when the NFL was sort of
lying they had a problem and my letter
to the commissioner so you don't admit
you have a problem you can't solve it
and it's gonna get worse and and that
came from marriages where especially the
guy went and met that they were
struggling and it ended up falling apart
yeah I can certainly understand that so
okay we admit that we have a problem
whether it's about weight or whatever
how do we begin to unwind this stuff
that's really I think the the important
thing is it does it just come down to
look there are because you you write in
the book and I wrote them down so I can
read them out if we need to but
um
they're just are there just certain
things you just have to do and you just
you have to do them and until you do
them like this is never going to change
well and that's the bad habit chapter
you know I have the bad habit dragons
there's the overeat or bad habit Dragon
the worst of all the dragons is the
oblivious dragon
the dragon is that an intentional like
you're intentionally being oblivious or
people that really just don't know you
just don't know and you haven't taken
the time you go I'm fat because
everybody in my family's fat it's like
no I have a lot of fat people in my
family and I'm not because I don't give
into the behaviors making it likely to
be so and so it's about being
intentional reading the labels of the
food you eat of the products you put on
your body it's asking yourself this one
question
is this good for my brain or bad for it
right I mean ultimately in all of my
books I try to create brain Envy I want
people to love their brains
um
and is this good for my brain or bad for
it and the reason that brain Envy works
just to be clear is because you can
improve your brain how exciting is that
and I've proven that over and over in
NFL players and soldiers and police
officers that you're not stuck and
intuitively people should know that
right if I don't sleep tonight and I'm
not going to think well tomorrow but no
one's thinking about the physical
functioning of their brain so I'm in
Justin Bieber's new docu-series seasons
and he came out I've been his doctor for
a long time and like many celebrities
he'd do what I'd say sometimes I show up
sometimes but then because he went
through a really hard time he came into
my office and he said I get it my brain
is an organ like my heart is an organ if
you told me I had heart problems I'd do
everything thing you say I'm going to do
everything you say and he got radically
better and
you gotta love it
and and we have to stop this whole
mental illness thing I hate it because
it's not mental illness it's brain
health right get your brain right and
your mood is better you're happier
you're more focused you make less bad
decisions
which will decrease your anxiety
speaking of anxiety so you said earlier
that you think 30 percent of mental
health brain health problems are tied to
diet
in my n of one experience I think it's
even higher than that so when I think
about okay suffering from profound
anxiety I'm trying all the mental tricks
and there's no doubt they helped I mean
very very beneficial but I just couldn't
I felt like I was learning to better
cope with these symptoms but I wasn't
eliminating the symptoms and so I was
like what is going on and then of course
because of what my wife went through
from a health perspective become aware
of the gut start really thinking about
what I'm eating and that there are going
to be things that might be messing me up
that I just would never have guessed
long time listeners in my show will grow
tired of hearing the following statement
but at the beginning of covid I went
through something really weird that I'd
never experienced before it was getting
super tired all the time brain fog just
like almost losing my zest for life and
I was like this is really bizarre and I
thought okay well what would you tell
somebody if they came and describe those
symptoms and I was like no matter what I
would tell element something that you're
eating because that's just so true in
terms of the way if your body's being
affected your brain's being affected
it's almost certainly something you're
eating
and I'm like but my diet's so healthy
like how could this possibly be and I
was like just eliminate whatever you're
eating a lot of and see what happens and
I'm like what am I eating a lot of and I
was like pecans and so I cut out pecans
48 hours later I was back in business I
was like how the hell is it possible
that pecans evolved and they were like
raw they weren't even like roasted I
mean these were like the [__] all but
just plucked off a tree so I was I
anyway I couldn't fathom that that was
it but it was it and then that got me
thinking wait a second could my anxiety
be tied to something I'm eating and so
then I started cutting out anything
processed because dude I love my zero
calorie drinks love them in a way I
can't even begin to tell you but of
course that comes with a lot of
chemicals that I've never even heard of
and I've heard of a lot of chemicals and
in cutting all of that out the what my
anxiety feels like to me now I might
still have a thought about something's
going to go wrong in the future and that
will trigger that that feeling of like
oh something bad is coming
but it never escalates food is so
important and
um
when I put my patients on an Elimination
Diet so we basically eliminate the bad
things
they get
so much better
and the nutritionists that work with us
have more success stories than the
psychiatrists and how you stay irritate
me Food Matters what you put in your
mouth your microbiome matters we have
these hundred trillion bugs in our gut
and what we feed them you know helps to
grow the ones that make you happy or
they help to grow the ones that make you
angry and sad
um it's just so important and our
biggest blog last year uh I wrote one
called I Told You So and when I and I
started with when I dated Tana she told
me I will never tell you I told you so
she lied it's like her favorite thing to
say and then
I said but the American Cancer Society
just came out and said you shouldn't
drink
why it increases your risk of seven
different kinds of cancer not to mention
a prematurely ageless people were given
that advice I was like uh like this one
just doesn't land for me it just doesn't
seem possible that it would be
essentially a health food what about
weed
marijuana
is in
that it's very endless it's in I
published a study on a thousand
marijuana users every year their brain
is lower in activity now does help some
people like when my father and what what
does it actually help with it helps
increase appetite
for some people it can actually decrease
seizure frequency it suppresses activity
in the brain
I'm very worried because as the
perception of dangerousness of a drug
goes down its use goes up especially in
teenagers and if you're smoking or
eating Edibles as a teenager you've just
increased your risk of anxiety
depression and suicide in your 20s so
that's it's not good and I you know all
child psychiatrists I'm also a child
psychiatrists have the experience of all
of a sudden the 16 year old is not
acting right and we test them and they
end up positive for marijuana that it's
not innocuous and I think that's the
important thing now is it worse than
alcohol well actually I published a
study on 62 000 this is the world's
largest Imaging study 62 000 scans on
how the brain ages and then we looked at
what accelerated aging schizophrenia was
the worst your brain looked 10 years
older than people who didn't have
schizophrenia the second worst and it
was a surprise for me was marijuana your
brain worse than alcohol or worse than
alcohol worse than smoking what I am
startled by that yeah I was too and it's
like it's the data and wow I have no dog
in the fight right if you smoke if you
don't smoke you're just actually more
likely to see me if you do is it
lowering blood flow like it's watering
blood flow to the brain
wow I thought for sure you were going to
say alcohol was the worst yeah but
neither of them are good
man that's crazy
yeah so food can make you happy so can
drugs that's the that's the problem like
when I think about all the the insults
that people can do to their brain how
important the brain is for the mind and
that your mind if you don't have your
mind under control your life your life
will be determined by how well you
control your mind like I just because
ultimately all we are is a string of
emotions things either make you feel
good bad or indifferent and when you
spend a lot of time feeling bad life
sucks when you spend a lot of time
feeling good life is great and it
doesn't matter if you have all the money
in the world if you feel bad life sucks
doesn't matter if you're broke as a day
is long if you feel good life is great
so
but the number of things that insult our
brain from just concussive trauma from
certain types of contact Sports to
um sitting around to
weed alcohol a lot of things that are
fun and over prescription of drugs oh my
God Gadget screen time like yeah
negative thoughts like it is bananas and
the amount of time that people have to
put into getting it right so we have a
high school course called brain Thrive
by 25. and
I love this course
and we play a game with them called who
has more fun
the kid with the good brain or the kid
with the bad brain who gets the girl and
gets to keep her because he doesn't act
like an ass the kid with a good brainer
the kid with the battery who gets into
college who gets the job they want who
has the most consistent positive
behavior it's the person with the good
brain this is not about not having fun
it's about having fun with all of you
intact
yeah and over a prolonged period of time
over a prolonged period of time
Dr Ayman thank you so much for coming on
dude I always love your books and time
with you where can people connect with
you and ensure that they have the good
brain over a long period of time
well they can find us at amonclinics.com
so Eamon like the last word in a prayer
clinics.com they can follow me on
Facebook or Instagram Instagram it's at
Doc underscore Eamon we're doing a whole
cool series called scan my brain I've
done some just wonderful influencers
it's super fun and
um we want to create a revolution in
brain health we want to end mental
illness and that whole discussion and
really start talking
with a better brain always comes a
better life
we're cancer patients are taking
psychedelics to deal with the
existential crisis of a cancer diagnosis
that's even higher than to me it's like
because you're starting to think like
this parts of me are eating myself from
the inside and growing inside me it
could give you a real sense of what what
is identity